docs(managed-postgres): add Query Insights page (#6228)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/cloud/managed-postgres/monitoring/query-insights.md

keywords: ['managed postgres', 'query insights', 'pg_stat_ch', 'slow queries', 'p99 latency', 'query patterns', 'postgres performance', 'temp blocks', 'parallel workers', 'wal']
doc_type: 'guide'
---

import PrivatePreviewBadge from '@theme/badges/PrivatePreviewBadge';
import Image from '@theme/IdealImage';
import queryInsightsOverview from '@site/static/images/managed-postgres/monitoring/query-insights-overview.png';
import queryInsightsPatterns from '@site/static/images/managed-postgres/monitoring/query-insights-patterns.png';
import queryInsightsRecentQueries from '@site/static/images/managed-postgres/monitoring/query-insights-recent-queries.png';
import queryInsightsDetailAggregate from '@site/static/images/managed-postgres/monitoring/query-insights-detail-aggregate.png';
import queryInsightsDetailRecent from '@site/static/images/managed-postgres/monitoring/query-insights-detail-recent.png';

# Postgres query insights

<PrivatePreviewBadge link="https://clickhouse.com/cloud/postgres" galaxyTrack={true} slug="query-insights" />

> Query Insights captures per-statement telemetry from your
> [Managed Postgres](/cloud/managed-postgres) instance and ranks every query
> pattern by impact, so you can go from "p99 is creeping up" to "this pattern
> is spilling to disk" without leaving the cloud console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Query insights capture per-statement telemetry from your
[Managed Postgres](/cloud/managed-postgres) instance and rank every query
pattern by impact, so you can go from "p99 is creeping up" to "this pattern
is spilling to disk" without leaving the cloud console.
```

> The data comes from [`pg_stat_ch`](https://github.com/clickhouse/pg_stat_ch),
> the open-source Postgres extension that streams per-statement counters into
> ClickHouse Cloud. Telemetry is normalized inside Postgres before it leaves
> the database — literals are stripped and replaced with placeholders, so the
> exact values you query never enter the telemetry stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data comes from [`pg_stat_ch`](https://github.com/clickhouse/pg_stat_ch) which is an open-source Postgres extension that streams per-statement counters into
ClickHouse Cloud. Telemetry is normalized inside Postgres before it leaves
the database by stripping literals are replacing them with placeholders, so the
exact values you query never enter the telemetry stream.
```

## Open query insights {#open}

Open your Managed Postgres instance in the cloud console and click

> **Query insights** in the left sidebar. The page is divided into four
> surfaces, in the order you'd actually use them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Query insights** in the left sidebar. The page is divided into four
surfaces, ordered in the natural way you'd use them:
```

- An **Overview** that fits a database health check on one screen.
- A **Slow patterns** table that ranks every query pattern your database
  has run, sorted by whatever you suspect.
- A **Recent queries** panel that lists individual executions in reverse
  chronological order.
- A **Detail flyout** that aggregates every counter for a single pattern.

Use the **Time period** selector at the top to switch between the last 15
minutes, hour, day, week, or month. Aggregation bucket size adjusts

> automatically — 1-minute buckets for the last 15 minutes or hour,
> 5-minute for the last day, and 1-hour for the last week or month — so the
> charts stay responsive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically with 1-minute buckets for the last 15 minutes or hour,
5-minute for the last day, and 1-hour for the last week or month. This ensures charts stay responsive.
```

## Overview {#overview}

The overview is a 3×2 grid of six panels:

| Panel | What it shows |
|---|---|
| **Queries / sec** | Query volume normalized to a rate over the selected window. |
| **Query latency** | Mean, p50, p95, and p99 on one chart, so you can see when the tail diverges from the median. |
| **Operations breakdown** | A donut chart of the mix of `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and other operations your workload is actually made of. |
| **Rows returned / affected** | Total rows the workload moved over the window. |
| **Buffer hit ratio** | A donut chart of shared blocks hit vs. shared blocks read, with total CPU time on the legend. |
| **Errors** | Total error count, broken out over time. |

> One screen tells you whether the database is healthy. A healthy instance
> has a familiar shape — buffer hit ratio in the high nineties, query volume
> moving with application traffic, error rate flat or zero, and percentile
> latencies tracking each other closely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single screen is able to tell you whether the database is healthy. A healthy instance
has a familiar shape: buffer hit ratio in the high nineties, query volume
moving with application traffic, error rate flat or zero, and percentile
latencies tracking each other closely.
```

<Image img={queryInsightsOverview} alt="Query Insights overview showing the six stats cards: queries per second, query latency percentiles, operations breakdown donut, rows returned area chart, buffer hit ratio donut at 95.2 percent, and an errors column chart" size="lg" border/>

## Slow patterns {#slow-patterns}

> When the overview points at trouble, the patterns table is where the
> investigation starts. One row per normalized query pattern, with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the overview indicates trouble in your database health, the patterns table is a good place to begin your investigation. It contains one row per normalized query pattern, with the
```

literals stripped out so executions of the same statement collapse onto
the same row.

<Image img={queryInsightsPatterns} alt="Slow query patterns table showing one row per normalized query with Database, User, Operation, Calls, Errors, Avg latency, P95, Max latency, Total runtime, Rows returned, and Cache hit columns" size="lg" border/>

### Sort by what you suspect {#sort}

> The table defaults to **Total runtime** descending — when you sort this
> way, the top pattern is usually the answer to "what is costing me the
> most?" It may not be the slowest pattern individually. A query that runs
> eight million times a day at twelve milliseconds can matter more than
> one that ran once at three seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table defaults to **Total runtime** in descending order. When you sort this
way, the top pattern usually provides an answer to the question "what is costing me the
most?". Note that it may not necessarily be the slowest pattern individually. A query that runs
eight million times a day for twelve milliseconds can matter more than
one that ran once for three seconds.
```

Each sort gives you a different lens:

> - **Total runtime** — where the database spent the most wall-clock time.
> - **CPU time** — compute-heavy patterns.
> - **Calls** — high-frequency patterns.
> - **Errors** — repeated failures.
> - **Avg / P50 / P95 / P99 / Max latency** — outliers, by percentile.
> - **Rows returned**, **Blocks read**, **Blocks hit**, **WAL bytes** —
>   patterns that moved the most data through the engine, the cache, or
>   the write-ahead log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Total runtime** — shows where the database spent the most wall-clock time.
- **CPU time** — shows compute-heavy patterns.
- **Calls** — shows high-frequency patterns.
- **Errors** — shows repeated failures.
- **Avg / P50 / P95 / P99 / Max latency** — shows outliers by percentile.
- **Rows returned**, **Blocks read**, **Blocks hit**, **WAL bytes** —
  shows patterns that moved the most data through the engine, the cache, or
  the write-ahead log.
```

<Image img={queryInsightsDetailRecent} alt="Query detail flyout continued, showing the Query context section with database, user, operation, and application, and a Recent executions card with timestamp, OK status, server role, host id, and per-execution counters for duration, rows, cache hit, CPU, shared blocks read, and shared blocks hit" size="md" border/>

### Per-execution counters {#counters}

Expand a recent execution and you get the counters that pinpoint where
the time went:

- **Shared blocks** — read and hit always shown; written and dirtied
  shown when non-zero.
- **Local and temp block ops** — non-zero temp block ops mean a sort or
  hash spilled to disk.
- **Read / write time** — I/O time, separately from CPU time.
- **CPU time** — user and system, separately.
- **Parallel workers** — planned vs. actually launched.
- **JIT** — total JIT compilation time and function count.
- **WAL** — bytes and record count.

Everything you need to diagnose a slow pattern is in one place, on one
screen.

> ## How it works {#how-it-works}

Reviewer: This section is very "marketing" sounding for a docs page :D

> ## How it works {#how-it-works}
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How it works {#how-it-works}

`pg_stat_ch` serves as the underlying mechanism for query insights and operates on the principles outlined below.
```

> ### Normalized in Postgres, before the wire {#how-normalized}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Normalize in Postgres, before the wire {#how-normalized}
```

`pg_stat_ch` hooks the parse-analyze phase, swaps each literal for a
placeholder (`$1`, `$2`, …), and caches the resulting pattern in a
per-backend LRU keyed by `queryid`. When the executor finishes the
statement, that cached pattern is what gets attached to the event. The
exact statement with values never leaves the database.

> ### Out of the way of the database {#how-overhead}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Keep overhead low {#how-overhead}
```

The producer adds roughly 3% overhead per statement. The enqueue path
uses a non-blocking try-lock on a shared-memory ring buffer. Under
pressure, the extension drops events with a counter rather than
back-pressuring Postgres.

> ### Raw events, not aggregates {#how-raw-events}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prefer raw events, not aggregates {#how-raw-events}
```

`pg_stat_ch` emits one raw event per executed statement (top-level and
nested), subject to sampling. Every percentile, ranking, and breakdown
in the UI is a ClickHouse query against the same event stream.

> ### Same engine our customers use {#how-engine}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use the same engine {#how-engine}
```
